Add threat model (#24497)
cilium-team/cilium: Documentation/security/threat-model.rst

Threat Model
============

This section presents a threat model for Cilium. This threat model
allows interested parties to understand:

-  security-specific implications of Cilium’s architecture
-  controls that are in place to secure data flowing through Cilium’s various components
-  recommended controls for running Cilium in a production environment

Scope and Prerequisites
-----------------------

This threat model considers the possible attacks that could affect an
up-to-date version of Cilium running in a production environment; it
will be refreshed when there are significant changes to Cilium’s
architecture or security posture.

This model does not consider supply-chain attacks, such as attacks where
a malicious contributor is able to intentionally inject vulnerable code
into Cilium. For users who are concerned about supply-chain attacks,
Cilium’s `security audit`_ assessed Cilium’s supply chain controls
against `the SLSA framework`_.

In order to understand the following threat model, readers will need
familiarity with basic Kubernetes concepts, as well as a high-level
understanding of Cilium’s :ref:`architecture and components<component_overview>`.

> .. _recent security audit: https://github.com/cilium/cilium.io/blob/main/Security-Reports/CiliumSecurityAudit2022.pdf

Reviewer: This has not been updated, causing the GitHub workflow to complain:

```suggestion
.. _security audit: https://github.com/cilium/cilium.io/blob/main/Security-Reports/CiliumSecurityAudit2022.pdf
```

Author: Thanks for the spot!

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    https://docs.cilium.io

Threat Model
============

This section presents a threat model for Cilium. This threat model
allows interested parties to understand:

-  security-specific implications of Cilium’s architecture
-  controls that are in place to secure data flowing through Cilium’s various components
-  recommended controls for running Cilium in a production environment

Scope and Prerequisites
-----------------------

This threat model considers the possible attacks that could affect an
up-to-date version of Cilium running in a production environment; it

> will be refreshed when there are significant changes to Cilium’s

Reviewer: Nitpick: Can we please avoid curly apostrophes and curly quotes in the RST doc? I understand these are usually resulting from copy/pasting from Google Docs, but it always make things more painful whenever we need to grep or otherwise process the docs.

Reviewer: Thanks for fixing the apostrophes, can we also have straight double quotes please? :pray:

Author: Argh, of course. Done.

architecture or security posture.

This model does not consider supply-chain attacks, such as attacks where
a malicious contributor is able to intentionally inject vulnerable code
into Cilium. For users who are concerned about supply-chain attacks,

> Cilium’s `recent security audit`_ assessed Cilium’s supply chain controls

Reviewer: I'd drop `recent`, or add a date, because it's only recent at the time of your writing.

```suggestion
Cilium’s `security audit`_ assessed Cilium’s supply chain controls
```

against `the SLSA framework`_.

In order to understand the following threat model, readers will need
familiarity with basic Kubernetes concepts, as well as a high-level
understanding of Cilium’s :ref:`architecture and components<component_overview>`.

.. _recent security audit: https://github.com/cilium/cilium.io/blob/main/Security-Reports/CiliumSecurityAudit2022.pdf
.. _the SLSA framework:  https://slsa.dev/

Methodology
-----------

This threat model considers eight different types of threat

> actor, placed at different parts of a typical deployment stack. We will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
actors, placed at different parts of a typical deployment stack. We will
```

that we identify, we recommend controls that can be used to reduce the
risk of the identified attacks compromising a cluster. Applying the
recommended controls is strongly advised in order to run Cilium securely
in production.

.. _the STRIDE methodology: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/STRIDE_(security)

Reference Architecture
----------------------

For ease of understanding, consider a single Kubernetes
cluster running Cilium, as illustrated below:

.. image:: images/cilium_threat_model_reference_architecture.png

The Threat Surface
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the above scenario, the aim of Cilium’s security controls is to
ensure that all the components of the Cilium platform are operating
correctly, to the extent possible given the abilities of the threat
actor that Cilium is faced with. The key components that need to be
protected are:

-  the Cilium agent running on a node, either as a Kubernetes pod, a host process, or as an entire virtual machine
-  Cilium state (either stored via CRDs or via an external key-value store like etcd)
-  eBPF programs loaded by Cilium into the kernel
-  Network packets managed by Cilium

> -  Observability data collected by Cilium and stored by Hubble

Reviewer: Consistency

```suggestion
-  network packets managed by Cilium
-  observability data collected by Cilium and stored by Hubble
```

attacks, as well as the security controls that Cilium provides. For
attacks which might arise as a consequence of the high level of
privileges required by Cilium, we also suggest mitigations that users
should apply to secure their environments.

.. _kubernetes-workload-attacker:

Kubernetes Workload Attacker
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For the first scenario, consider an attacker who has been able to
gain access to a Kubernetes pod, and is now able to run arbitrary code
inside a container. This could occur, for example, if a vulnerable
service is exposed externally to a network. In this case, let us also
assume that the compromised pod does not have any elevated privileges
(in Kubernetes or on the host) or direct access to host files.

.. image:: images/cilium_threat_model_workload.png

In this scenario, there is no potential for compromise of the Cilium
stack; in fact, Cilium provides several features that would allow users
to limit the scope of such an attack:

.. rst-class:: wrapped-table

+-----------------+---------------------+--------------------------------+
| **Threat        | **Identified STRIDE | **Cilium security benefits**   |

> | surface**       | threats**           |                                |

Reviewer: No need for bold mark-up, here or for any other table header; it's already bold by default.

```suggestion
| Threat surface  | Identified STRIDE   | Cilium security benefits       |
|                 | threats             |                                |
```

+=================+=========================+============================+
| Cilium agent    | - If the non-privileged |                            |
|                 |   attacker is able to   |                            |
|                 |   access the container  |                            |
|                 |   runtime and Cilium is |                            |
|                 |   running as a          |                            |
|                 |   container, the        |                            |
|                 |   attacker will be able |                            |
|                 |   to tamper with the    |                            |
|                 |   Cilium agent running  |                            |
|                 |   on the node.*         |                            |
|                 | - Denial of service is  |                            |
|                 |   also possible via     |                            |
|                 |   spawning workloads    |                            |
|                 |   directly on the host. |                            |
+-----------------+-------------------------+----------------------------+

> | Cilium          | Same as above (*)       |                            |

Reviewer: Where does this asterisk point to? ([here](https://xkcd.com/2708/)? :) )
Please make it a link instead.

Author: 👋 thanks for the feedback! I'm trying to point to the cell immediately above in this case. I tried using a link just now using the standard `:ref:` syntax, but something about my browser (Chrome)/the template/rst means that clicking on the link doesn't take you to the top of the cell containing the reference, but instead to a weird midpoint of the cell, where you can't actually see the linked text.

Can you think of a workaround or a better way of expressing the same point? I could switch it to 'Same as for the Cilium agent above.', perhaps?

Reviewer: OK let's drop the links if they behave funny. “Same as for the Cilium agent” should work, or just “Same as above”, even. It's the `(*)` with no visible destination that I found confusing.

| configuration   |                         |                            |
|                 |                         |                            |
|                 |                         |                            |
|                 |                         |                            |
|                 |                         |                            |
|                 |                         |                            |
|                 |                         |                            |
|                 |                         |                            |
+-----------------+-------------------------+----------------------------+

> | Cilium eBPF     | Same as above (*)       |                            |

Reviewer: ... Same as above :)

|                 |                         | to provide reliable audit  |
|                 |                         | of the attacker’s L3/L4    |
|                 |                         | and L7 network             |
|                 |                         | connectivity. Traffic sent |
|                 |                         | by the attacker will be    |
|                 |                         | attributed to the worker   |
|                 |                         | node, and not to a         |
|                 |                         | specific Kubernetes        |
|                 |                         | workload.                  |
+-----------------+-------------------------+----------------------------+

Recommended Controls
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In addition to the recommended controls against the :ref:`kubernetes-workload-attacker`:

-  Container images should be regularly patched to reduce the chance of
   compromise
-  Minimal container images should be used where possible
-  Host-level privileges should be avoided where possible
-  Ensure that the container users do not have access to the underlying

>    container runtime

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  Container images should be regularly patched to reduce the chance of
   compromise.
-  Minimal container images should be used where possible.
-  Host-level privileges should be avoided where possible.
-  Ensure that the container users do not have access to the underlying
   container runtime.
```

|                  | - Without transparent encryption, the attacker    |
|                  |   could re-create the observability data as       |
|                  |   available on the network level.                 |
|                  | - Information leakage could occur via an attacker |
|                  |   scraping Hubble Prometheus metrics. These       |
|                  |   metrics are disabled by default, and            |
|                  |   can contain sensitive information on network    |
|                  |   flows.                                          |
|                  | - Denial of service could occur depending on the  |
|                  |   behavior of the attacker.                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+

Recommended Controls
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:ref:`gsg_encryption` should be configured to ensure the confidentiality of
communication between workloads.

TLS should be configured for communication between the Prometheus
metrics endpoints and the Prometheus server.

Network policies should be configured such that only the Prometheus

> server is allowed to scrape :ref:`Hubble metrics <metrics>` in particular.

Reviewer: Let's use a list like for the previous sections, for consistency?

```suggestion
- :ref:`gsg_encryption` should be configured to ensure the confidentiality of
  communication between workloads.
- TLS should be configured for communication between the Prometheus
  metrics endpoints and the Prometheus server.
- Network policies should be configured such that only the Prometheus
  server is allowed to scrape :ref:`Hubble metrics <metrics>` in particular.
```

|                  |    or :ref:`key-value store attacker              |
|                  |    <kv-store-attacker>`                           |
|                  |    they could also spoof traffic by spoofing      |
|                  |    pod identities.                                |
|                  |                                                   |
|                  | Denial of service could occur depending on the    |
|                  | behavior of the attacker.                         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Observability    | - Denial of service could occur depending on the  |
| data             |   behavior of the attacker.                       |
|                  | - Information leakage could occur via an attacker |
|                  |   scraping Cilium or Hubble Prometheus metrics,   |
|                  |   depending on the specific metrics enabled.      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+

Recommended Controls
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:ref:`gsg_encryption` should be configured to ensure the confidentiality of

> communication between workloads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- :ref:`gsg_encryption` should be configured to ensure the confidentiality of
  communication between workloads.
```

.. _kubernetes-api-server-attacker:

> Kubernetes API Server Attacker

Reviewer: No diagram? I liked them a lot for the previous subsections :grin: They help visualise the context, and even help reading the docs by separating each subsection.

Same questions for the remaining subsections below.

Author: I originally didn't think there was a neat way of representing the attacker in a diagram accurately for these threats, but gave it a go after this comment. I agree the consistency is better, although I'm still ambivalent about how accurate/intuitive the API server and Hubble attacker representations are. lmk what you think!

Reviewer: Thanks, I think they look great!

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This type of attack could be carried out by any user or code with
network access to the Kubernetes API server and credentials that allow
Kubernetes API requests. Such permissions would allow the user to read
or manipulate the API server state (for example by changing CRDs).

> This is not a precise term, as different RBAC policies could grant many

Reviewer: `This is not a precise term` -> what does `This` refer to?

Author: I have removed that sentence, I think it made more sense in an older version of the document but agree that it wasn't clear (and didn't add anything) as it ended up in the PR.

> different types of privilege. This section is intended to cover any

Reviewer: ```suggestion
different types of privileges. This section is intended to cover any
```

|                  |    resources would allow an attacker to tamper    |
|                  |    with the identities of pods.                   |
|                  | -  The ability to delete Kubernetes or Cilium     |
|                  |    NetworkPolicies would remove policy            |
|                  |    enforcement.                                   |
|                  | -  Creating a large number of CiliumIdentity      |
|                  |    resources could result in denial of service.   |
|                  | -  Workloads external to the cluster could be     |
|                  |    added to the network.                          |
|                  | -  Traffic routing settings between workloads     |
|                  |    could be modified                              |
|                  |                                                   |
|                  | The cumulative effect of such actions could       |
|                  | result in the escalation of a single-node         |
|                  | compromise into a multi-node compromise.          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+

> | Cilium eBPF      | Same as above. (†)                                |

Reviewer: Let's remove the dagger and use a link.

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    https://docs.cilium.io

Threat Model
============

In this section, we present a threat model for Cilium. This threat model

> allows interested parties to understand:

Reviewer 2: nit, wording:

```suggestion
This section presents a threat model for Cilium. This threat model
allows interested parties to understand:
```

Reviewer 2: (This is the general tone we try for in Cilium docs - state the facts about the content rather than including references to certain parties, including the authors).

-  security-specific implications of Cilium’s architecture
-  controls that are in place to secure data flowing through Cilium’s various components
-  recommended controls for running Cilium in a production environment

Scope and Prerequisites
-----------------------

This threat model considers the possible attacks that could affect an
up-to-date version of Cilium running in a production environment; it
will be refreshed when there are significant changes to Cilium’s
architecture or security posture.

This model does not consider supply-chain attacks, such as attacks where
a malicious contributor is able to intentionally inject vulnerable code
into Cilium. For users who are concerned about supply-chain attacks,
Cilium’s `recent security audit`_ assessed Cilium’s supply chain controls
against `the SLSA framework`_.

In order to understand the following threat model, readers will need
familiarity with basic Kubernetes concepts, as well as a high-level
understanding of Cilium’s `architecture and components`_.

.. _recent security audit: https://github.com/cilium/cilium.io/blob/main/Security-Reports/CiliumSecurityAudit2022.pdf
.. _the SLSA framework:  https://slsa.dev/

> .. _architecture and components: https://docs.cilium.io/en/stable/overview/component-overview/

Reviewer 2: It's best to avoid full internal links in the tree, since we end up maintaining multiple versions, and this can inadvertently lead users who are reading one version of the docs into another different version of the docs and confuse them.

I'd suggest using internal anchors + `:ref:` instead - ie, apply this diff on top of the branch:

```
diff --git a/Documentation/overview/component-overview.rst b/Documentation/overview/component-overview.rst
index 3ef1f05e511a..7c8ce2809cf6 100644
--- a/Documentation/overview/component-overview.rst
+++ b/Documentation/overview/component-overview.rst
@@ -4,6 +4,8 @@
     Please use the official rendered version released here:
     https://docs.cilium.io
 
+.. _component_overview:
+
 ******************
 Component Overview
 ******************
diff --git a/Documentation/security/threat-model.rst b/Documentation/security/threat-model.rst
index 33b3fb0b8344..bfbe4b4788fe 100644
--- a/Documentation/security/threat-model.rst
+++ b/Documentation/security/threat-model.rst
@@ -30,11 +30,10 @@ against `the SLSA framework`_.
 
 In order to understand the following threat model, readers will need
 familiarity with basic Kubernetes concepts, as well as a high-level
-understanding of Cilium’s `architecture and components`_.
+understanding of Cilium’s :ref:`architecture and components<component_overview>`.
 
 .. _recent security audit: https://github.com/cilium/cilium.io/blob/main/Security-Reports/CiliumSecurityAudit2022.pdf
 .. _the SLSA framework:  https://slsa.dev/
-.. _architecture and components: https://docs.cilium.io/en/stable/overview/component-overview/
 
 Methodology
 -----------
```

Author: 👍 makes sense, I had done this elsewhere but forgot here. Thanks for the spot!

Methodology
-----------

> In this threat model, we will consider eight different types of threat

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This threat model considers eight different types of threat
```

actor, placed at different parts of a typical deployment stack. We will
primarily use Kubernetes as an example but the threat model remains
accurate if deployed with other orchestration systems, or when running
Cilium outside of Kubernetes. The attackers will have different levels
of initial privileges, giving us a broad overview of the security
guarantees that Cilium can provide depending on the nature of the threat
and the extent of a previous compromise.

> For each threat actor, we assess the likely attacks using `the STRIDE
> methodology`_. Where one attack type in the STRIDE set can lead to others

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For each threat actor, this guide uses the `the STRIDE methodology`_ to
assess likely attacks. Where one attack type in the STRIDE set can lead to others
```

(for example, tampering leading to denial of service), we have described the
attack path under the most impactful attack type. For the potential attacks
that we identify, we recommend controls that can be used to reduce the
risk of the identified attacks compromising a cluster. Applying the
recommended controls is strongly advised in order to run Cilium securely
in production.

.. _the STRIDE methodology: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/STRIDE_(security)

Reference Architecture
----------------------

> For ease of understanding, we are going to consider a single Kubernetes

Reviewer 2: In this case we can use the imperative, to instruct the reader about how to think about the problem:
```suggestion
For ease of understanding, consider a single Kubernetes
```

The Threat Surface
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the above scenario, the aim of Cilium’s security controls is to
ensure that all the components of the Cilium platform are operating
correctly, to the extent possible given the abilities of the threat
actor that Cilium is faced with. The key components that need to be
protected are:

-  the Cilium agent running on a node, either as a Kubernetes pod, a host process, or as an entire virtual machine
-  Cilium state (either stored via CRDs or via an external key-value store like etcd)
-  eBPF programs loaded by Cilium into the kernel
-  Network packets managed by Cilium
-  Observability data collected by Cilium and stored by Hubble

The Threat Model
----------------

For each type of attacker, we consider the plausible types of attacks
available to them, how Cilium can be used to protect against these
attacks, as well as the security controls that Cilium provides. For
attacks which might arise as a consequence of the high level of
privileges required by Cilium, we also suggest mitigations that users
should apply to secure their environments.

.. _kubernetes-workload-attacker:

Kubernetes Workload Attacker
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> For our first scenario, let’s consider an attacker who has been able to

Reviewer 2: (Similar to previous case):

```suggestion
For the first scenario, consider an attacker who has been able to
```

|                 |                     | encryption is not in use.    |
|                 |                     | Pods cannot send traffic     |
|                 |                     | that “spoofs” other pods due |
|                 |                     | to limits on the use of      |
|                 |                     | source IPs and limits on     |
|                 |                     | sending tunneled traffic.    |
+-----------------+---------------------+------------------------------+
| Observability   | None                | Cilium’s Hubble flow-event   |
| data            |                     | observability can be used to |
|                 |                     | provide reliable audit of    |
|                 |                     | the attacker’s L3/L4 and L7  |
|                 |                     | network connectivity.        |
+-----------------+---------------------+------------------------------+

.. _bandwidth limitations: https://docs.cilium.io/en/stable/network/kubernetes/bandwidth-manager/

Recommended Controls
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Kubernetes workloads should have `defined resource limits`_.

>    This will help in ensuring that Cilium is not starved of resources due to a misbehaving deployment elsewhere in a cluster.

Reviewer 2: Does 'elsewhere' have any implications here or can we drop it?

```suggestion
   This will help in ensuring that Cilium is not starved of resources due to a misbehaving deployment in a cluster.
```

-  Cilium can be given prioritized access to system resources either via
   Kubernetes, cgroups, or other controls.
-  Runtime security solutions such as `Tetragon`_ should be deployed to 
   ensure that container compromises can be detected as they occur.

.. _defined resource limits: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/
.. _Tetragon: https://github.com/cilium/tetragon

.. _limited-privilege-host-attacker:

Limited-privilege Host Attacker
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In this scenario, the attacker is someone with the ability to run
arbitrary code with direct access to the host PID or network namespace
(or both), but without “root” privileges that would allow them to
disable Cilium components or undermine the eBPF and other kernel state
Cilium relies on.

This level of access could exist for a variety of reasons, including:

-  Pods or other containers running in the host PID or network
   namespace, but not with “root” privileges. This includes
   ``hostNetwork: true`` and ``hostPID: true`` containers.

> -  Non-“root” SSH or other console access to a Kubernetes worker node.

Reviewer 2: I'm going back and forth a bit in my head about whether to consistently use the Kubernetes terminology in cases like below (which helpfully matches the diagrams), or switch to generic terminology that would help to reinforce that none of the underlying mechanisms here are Kubernetes-specific.

Example:

```suggestion
-  Non-“root” SSH or other console access to a node.
```

(I'm also fine with leaving this as-is, and if we want to improve this to be more generic in a subsequent set of changes we can do so after this PR)

Author: tgraf had a similar comment in the original document, so I think let's drop it from here.

   but as a non-privileged user.

.. image:: images/cilium_threat_model_non_privileged.png

In this case, an attacker would be able to bypass some of Cilium’s
network controls, as described below:

.. rst-class:: wrapped-table

+-----------------+-----------------------+----------------------------+
| **Threat        | **Identified STRIDE   | **Cilium security          |
| surface**       | threats**             | benefits**                 |
+=================+=======================+============================+
| Cilium agent    | If the non-privileged |                            |
|                 | attacker is able to   |                            |
|                 | access the container  |                            |
|                 | runtime and Cilium is |                            |
|                 | running as a          |                            |
|                 | container, the        |                            |
|                 | attacker will be able |                            |
|                 | to tamper with the    |                            |
|                 | Cilium agent running  |                            |

> |                 | on the node.          |                            |

Reviewer 2: I don't know if there's a better way to represent this threat, but this paragraph and the paragraphs under `Cilium configuration` and `Cilium eBPF programs` seem like the same threat to me. Do you consider them as different?

Possible suggestion, feel free to adopt or ignore at your discretion: The table makes it look like there are three threats. We might be able to use some sort of marker (`†`?) for the first instance and just write `Same as above (†)` in the rows below.

Author: Yep, I think that suggestion makes sense – I don't consider them as a different threat, but wanted to make it clear that the configuration and eBPF programs were also affected.

Have updated to use the marker.

|                 |                       | attributed to the worker   |
|                 |                       | node, and not to a         |
|                 |                       | specific Kubernetes        |
|                 |                       | workload.                  |
+-----------------+-----------------------+----------------------------+

Recommended Controls
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In addition to the recommended controls against the :ref:`kubernetes-workload-attacker`:

-  Container images should be regularly patched to reduce the chance of
   compromise
-  Minimal container images should be used where possible
-  Host-level privileges should be avoided where possible
-  Ensure that the container users do not have access to the underlying
   container runtime

.. _root-equivalent-host-attacker:

Root-equivalent Host Attacker
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A “root” privilege host attacker has full privileges to do everything on
the local host. This access could exist for several reasons, including:

-  Root SSH or other console access to the Kubernetes worker node.
-  A containerized workload that has escaped the container namespace as
   a privileged user.

> -  Pods running with ``privilege: true`` or other significant

Reviewer 2: I believe at least Kubernetes refers to this as `privileged`:
```suggestion
-  Pods running with ``privileged: true`` or other significant
```

   capabilities like ``CAP_SYS_ADMIN`` or ``CAP_BPF``.

.. image:: images/cilium_threat_model_root.png

.. rst-class:: wrapped-table

+-------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| **Threat          | **Identified STRIDE threats**                    |
| surface**         |                                                  |
+===================+==================================================+
| Cilium agent      | In this situation, all potential attacks covered |
|                   | by STRIDE are possible. Of note:                 |
|                   |                                                  |
|                   | -  The attacker would be able to disable eBPF on |
|                   |    the node, disabling Cilium’s network and      |
|                   |    runtime visibility and enforcement. All       |
|                   |    further operations by the attacker will be    |

> |                   |    unlimited and unaudited.                      |

Reviewer 2: I believe that this is accurate for the "root-equivalent Host attacker", though @jrfastab may have some ideas about ways to lock down & audit such cases as well.

(no change necessary at this time, just dropping an FYI)

|                  |    workload via spoofing identities               |
|                  | -  In native routing mode, the attacker could     |
|                  |    inspect communication between workloads. If    |
|                  |    the attacker was able to control the           |
|                  |    ipcache through another attack (for            |
|                  |    example, by either being a successful          |
|                  |    :ref:`API server attacker                      |
|                  |    <kubernetes-api-server-attacker>`              |
|                  |    or :ref:`key-value store attacker              | 
|                  |    <kv-store-attacker>`                           |
|                  |    they could also spoof traffic by spoofing      |
|                  |    pod identities.                                |
|                  |                                                   |
|                  | Denial of service could occur depending on the    |
|                  | behavior of the attacker.                         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+

> | Observability    | TLS is required for all connectivity between      |
> | data             | Cilium components, as well as for exporting       |
> |                  | data to other destinations (such as a S3,         |
> |                  | Splunk, or Elastic), removing the scope for       |
> |                  | spoofing or tampering.                            |

Reviewer 2: This text implies features that are not provided by Cilium:

```suggestion
| Observability    | TLS is required for all connectivity between      |
| data             | Cilium components, as well as for exporting       |
|                  | data to other destinations, removing the          |
|                  | scope for spoofing or tampering.                  |
```

|                  | |br| |br|                                         |
|                  | Without transparent encryption, the attacker      |
|                  | could re-create the observability data as         |
|                  | available on the network level.                   |
|                  | |br| |br|                                         |
|                  | Information leakage could occur via an attacker   |
|                  | scraping Hubble Prometheus metrics. These metrics |
|                  | are disabled by default, and depending on         |
|                  | configuration can contain sensitive information   |
|                  | on network flows.                                 |
|                  | |br| |br|                                         |
|                  | Denial of service could occur depending on the    |
|                  | behavior of the attacker.                         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+

Recommended Controls

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer 2: The equivalent previous sections used bulletpoints for this section, it would be good to be consistent.

|                  | scraping Cilium or Hubble Prometheus metrics,     |
|                  | depending on the specific metrics enabled.        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+

Recommended Controls
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:ref:`gsg_encryption` should be configured to ensure the confidentiality of
communication between workloads.

.. _kubernetes-api-server-attacker:

Kubernetes API Server Attacker
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This type of attack could be carried out by any user or code with
network access to the Kubernetes API server and credentials that allow
Kubernetes API requests. Such permissions would allow the user to read
or manipulate the API server state (for example by changing CRDs).

This is not a precise term, as different RBAC policies could grant many
different types of privilege. This section is intended to cover any
attack that might be exposed via Kubernetes API server access, whether
it is “full” API server access, or even limited API server access (for
example, access gained by compromising credentials used by Cilium).

`The Kubernetes documentation`_ offers more information about configuring RBAC.

> .. _The Kubernetes documentation: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/rbac/

Reviewer 2: I think that this reference should be included, but it seems like it's already included below under `Recommended controls`. Do we need it here? The sentence reads a bit odd all by itself here.

> For such an attacker, our threat matrix looks like:

Reviewer 2: nit, consistency:
```suggestion
For such an attacker, our threat matrix is as follows:
```

.. rst-class:: wrapped-table

+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| **Threat         | **Identified STRIDE threats**                     |
| surface**        |                                                   |
+==================+===================================================+
| Cilium agent     | A Kubernetes API user with ``kubectl exec``       |
|                  | access to the pod running Cilium effectively      |
|                  | becomes a :ref:`root-equivalent host              |
|                  | attacker <root-equivalent-host-attacker>`,        |
|                  | since Cilium runs as a privileged pod.            |
|                  | |br| |br|                                         |
|                  | Users with permissions to configure workload      |

> |                  | settings could cause denial of service.           |

Reviewer 2: I think that this one is similar to the workload attacker entry, including the Cilium security benefits? Do you think there is a good way to cross-reference?

Author: Have cross-linked!

+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Cilium           | The ability to modify the ``Cilium*``             |
| configuration    | CustomResourceDefinitions, as well as any         |
|                  | CustomResource from Cilium, in the cluster could  |
|                  | have the following effects:                       |
|                  |                                                   |
|                  | -  The ability to create or modify CiliumIdentity |
|                  |    and CiliumEndpoint or CiliumEndpointSlice      |
|                  |    resources would allow an attacker to tamper    |
|                  |    with the identities of pods.                   |
|                  | -  The ability to delete Kubernetes or Cilium     |
|                  |    NetworkPolicies would remove policy            |
|                  |    enforcement.                                   |

> |                  | -  Creating a large number of CiliumIdentity      |
> |                  |    resources could result in denial of service    |
> |                  |    service.                                       |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|                  | -  Creating a large number of CiliumIdentity      |
|                  |    resources could result in denial of service.   |
```

|                  | -  Workloads external to the cluster could be     |
|                  |    added to the network.                          |
|                  | -  Traffic routing settings between workloads     |
|                  |    could be modified                              |
|                  |                                                   |
|                  | The cumulative effect of such actions could       |
|                  | result in the escalation of a single-node         |
|                  | compromise into a multi-node compromise.          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Cilium eBPF      | None                                              |

> | programs         |                                                   |

Reviewer 2: Maybe this should also have a marker that indicates eBPF programs are also vulnerable for the `kubectl exec` case above, similar to my comments for the limited-privilege host attacker?

| surface**        |                                                   |
+==================+===================================================+
| Cilium agent     | None                                              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Cilium           | The ability to create or modify Identities or     |
| configuration    | Endpoints in etcd would allow an attacker to      |
|                  | “give” any pod any identity. The ability to spoof |
|                  | identities in this manner might be used to        |
|                  | escalate a single node compromise to a multi-node |
|                  | compromise, for example by spoofing identities to |
|                  | undermine ingress segmentation rules that would   |
|                  | be applied on remote nodes.                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Cilium eBPF      | None                                              |
| programs         |                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+

> | Network data     | None                                              |

Reviewer 2: I believe that there is also the possibility to influence routing of specific traffic and potentially introduce MITM a la https://github.com/cilium/cilium/security/advisories/GHSA-xr49-pqw6-848w .

+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Observability    | None                                              |
| data             |                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+

> Recommended Controls

Reviewer 2: I wonder if there's also some etcd authorization configuration that's worth noting.

Author: In our own docs the only suggestion we make is to [enable TLS](https://docs.cilium.io/en/stable/installation/k8s-install-external-etcd/#optional-configure-the-ssl-certificates) 

Is there anything in particular you were thinking of? I'm wary of recommending security controls that might not play nicely with Cilium if we haven't tested them.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we have any guides, just generally wondering about the notion of RBAC with etcd. If we don't have any idea about that then we can leave this suggestion out for now.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Kubernetes RBAC controls should be applied to restrict access to Kubernetes
   secrets.
-  Kubernetes audit logs should be used to detect access to secret data and
   alert if such access is suspicious.

> 

Reviewer 2: I think it's worth noting somewhere in this section that typically we would expect users to configure an independent etcd instance for Cilium's management of the network vs. the etcd instance that is typically deployed as part of configuring a Kubernetes cluster. By separating these, we can mitigate some degree of cluster-wide impacts for attackers that gain access only to the Cilium etcd credentials.

> Hubble Data Attacker

Reviewer 2: @rolinh may be interested to review this section.

production Kubernetes cluster with Cilium:

1. Ensure that Kubernetes roles are scoped correctly to the requirements of your
   users, and that service account permissions for pods are tightly scoped to
   the needs of the workloads. In particular, access to sensitive namespaces,
   ``exec`` actions, and Kubernetes secrets should all be highly controlled.
2. Use resource limits for workloads where possible to reduce the chance of
   denial of service attacks.
3. Ensure that workload privileges and capabilities are only granted when
   essential to the functionality of the workload, and ensure that specific
   controls to limit and monitor the behavior of the workload are in place.
4. Use :ref:`network policies <network_policy>` to ensure that network traffic in Kubernetes is segregated.
5. Use :ref:`gsg_encryption` in Cilium to ensure that communication between
   workloads is secured.
6. Enable Kubernetes audit logging, forward the audit logs to a centralized
   monitoring platform, and define alerting for suspicious activity.
7. Use `Tetragon`_ as a runtime security solution to rapidly detect unexpected
   behavior within your Kubernetes cluster.

> .. _network policies: https://docs.cilium.io/en/latest/security/policy/

Reviewer 2: This line should be unnecessary, since the reference above already uses an internal reference.
```suggestion
```
